any getting briar that's a little local
barber I hope to jog your memory that's
right I'm in esos home of the doctor
happy just across the Narrow Sea for
Westeros and the Seven Kingdoms just
around the corner from planet in doing
Star Wars rogue one has not far from dr.
Mann's planet in interstellar you might
be wondering what kind of magical plates
could combine such diverse locations and
the answer is of course I don't
with its volcanic Peaks glacial rugged
terrain and otherworldly style I've
learned if the ideal real-world
substitute the whole home of magical and
alien landscape really Wendy do however
perhaps it versatility czar film set is
more down to what this country lacks
rather than what it has you look around
me now what can you see we've got rocks
and grasses I'm stood on a Love Field
for the blast here in the distance but
what you can't see are trees right now a
little over 1% of Iceland is covered in
trees now we'll compare this with 13% in
the UK 33% in the United States and even
Australia which is extremely hot and
dusty a 16% so this is a staggeringly no
figure but that wasn't always the case a
couple of thousand years ago at least a
quarter of these country was forested
and I'd miss
yeah so what happened to all the trees
it all started here or pretty near here
at least towards the end of the 9th
century sailing west from their native
scandinavian lands Vikings discovered
the wooded island of Iceland and decided
to settle here the first settlement
became wreck of ik the modern-day
capital and Viking immigrants continued
to pour in over the succeeding decades
but a bigger population needs lots of
resources and before long trees were
being chopped down to make way for
agricultural land for timber to make
homes and ships and for charcoal to heat
homes through the harsh Arctic winters
little by little the birch forests gave
way to the other-worldly treeless
landscapes that define Iceland today in
a way the Vikings were Hollywood's first
set designers thousand years before
Hollywood even existed good news for the
film industry but not to such good news
for native inhabitants
though trees means no shelter from the
weather or worse one of Iceland's
numerous active volcanoes I'm actually
at the base of the Hekla volcano right
now but you can't see it because of the
weather when a volcano erupts it spews
lava and ash across the landscapes and
with no trees there's no defense meaning
that that ash can be lifted and blown
miles across the countryside and this
presents a real risk of sandstorms
sweeping across the land picking up dry
dusty soil and ash slamming it into
anything in its path a particularly bad
sandstorm in 1882 that was caused by
strong winds whipping up the loose soil
and ash buried local farms killed
hundreds of sheep and filled up entire
lakes and just to show you how bad
conditions can get the asphalt on the
road behind me has quite literally been
blown off worse still once the trees
have gone turns out is pretty tricky to
get them back the volcanic ash erodes of
the soil which makes it really hard for
vegetation including trees to take hold
and without an extensive root system
there isn't much left to hold the soil
together or intercept the water that
flows through it which leaves it dry
dusty and particularly susceptible to
erosion
[Music]
nonetheless progress is being made each
year hundreds of thousands of seedlings
are being planted across Iceland by
people like crane who for the past two
decades has been working to plant a
self-sustaining forest right here in the
shadow of the Hekla volcano so some
people might find it strange to plant a
forest at the base of volcano
why here yeah the idea is that we get
the trees growing back so we can stop
the Aspen growing and vomiting
agricultural areas nearby when you have
proper birds trees maybe up to a few
meters tall we ask just certain sound
like snow at the bottom of the forest
but on the barren land when you have
destroyed a forest it just flows and
destroys vegetation and soil I see all
right I'm gonna put another one in here
so good luck baby birch tree pressing it
and lifting it up closing it up then a
little bit of fertilizer yeah brilliant
so this is the furture seedling that
I've just planted and if you can't
really tell the difference between this
and all of the dry grass around it but
this actually is about you say year old
one year old former seat and then how
much will it grow in another year this
summer probably grow up to double its
size but then maybe five years it will
grow up to close to 1 meter ok so it
seems like slow progress but actually
doubling in a year is pretty good yeah
thank you
but we are a nice length you know a bit
slow here I've just been planting tiny
one-year-old
birch trees and it's very clear that
this is a project with an extremely long
time frame the reality is that it's
going to take decades for my seedlings
to look anything like this
it feels almost eerily quiet in
comparison to being out there yeah
totally different deca system now so
what's the aim for you how much of a
percentage of Iceland's land do you
think should return to this kind of
coverage well I would like to have at
least 5% of Iceland some kind of forest
that would be brilliant we've spoken a
lot about how spaces like this and these
forests of benefiting us and humans it
is having an impact on wildlife animals
of course we have some new bird species
so when we had have these exotic forests
they can survive the first winter and
they begin to lay eggs you have less
erosion coming into the rivers which is
good for the fish and their life in the
water but I guess a lot of what brings
tourists to Iceland is its barren
landscapes
it's what appeals to Hollywood so do you
think people are reluctant to get rid of
that well some people worry about
tourists and you know want to protect
the barren landscapes and some people
even tell the tourists that this is
native landscape it is not it's a
man-made landscape thousand years of
unsustainable and use it should be
forest I think it's great yeah
[Music]
so this goes to show that Hanes efforts
are really paying off and all is not
lost for Iceland's forests and who knows
if successful here may be claims
techniques can be adopted in other
places that are facing similar
deforestation problems like the Easter
islands in the South Pacific meanwhile
I'm sure that Hollywood can dream up
some kind of forested alien planet to
add to Iceland's film set repertoire
maybe with a couple of mythical
creatures or two meanwhile if visiting
the natural world's greatest film set
sounds like your cup of tea then make
sure you check out this video because we
are looking to expand our digital family
with a presenter so do check out our BBC
Earth presenter search 2018 if you want
to get involved and also click here to
see some more about incredible videos
from Iceland subscribe click that bell
to be notified every time we upload a
new video and I'll see you soon bye now
what am i drag and go